README.md, before:

# Aiya

Artificial Intelligence: Your Assistant (AIYA). A modern(?) terminal tool for AI-assisted development with multi-provider support.

**Version 1.3.0** - Reworked MCP tools system and added some docs.

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/aiya-cli.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/js/aiya-cli)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Features

- Aiya.. this is just a budget version of all the other fancy LLM tools out there. Building this just for myself to test Ollama models.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 20 or higher
- At least one AI provider:
  - **Ollama**: Local models (qwen2.5-coder:7b, qwen3:8b, etc.)
  - **OpenAI**: API key for GPT-4, GPT-4 Turbo, etc.
  - **Google Gemini**: API key for Gemini 1.5 Pro/Flash models

## Installation

```bash
npm install -g aiya-cli
```

Or run from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jhyoong/Aiya.git
cd Aiya
npm install
npm run build
```

## Quick Start

1. Initialize Aiya in your project (interactive setup):
```bash
aiya init
```

2. Start an interactive chat session:
```bash
aiya chat
```

## Global Options

These options are available on all commands:
- `--verbose, -v` - Enable verbose logging for debugging
- `--config <path>` - Specify custom config file path

## Commands

### `aiya init`
Initialize Aiya configuration for the current project through an interactive setup wizard that guides you through provider configuration and connection testing.

### `aiya chat`
Start an interactive chat session with the AI featuring a modern terminal interface built with React/Ink.

#### Terminal Interface Features

#### Chat Commands
- **Command Suggestions**: Type `/` to see available commands with grey text hints. Press Tab to quickly select commands.
- `/read <file>` - Read and display file content in the terminal
- `/add <file>` - Add file content to context for the next prompt (silent)
- `/search <pattern>` - Search for files by name (default) or content with options
- `/tokens` - Show token usage statistics for the current session
- `/thinking` - Toggle thinking mode display (on/off/auto)
- `/model-switch` - Switch between configured AI providers mid-conversation
- `help` - Show available commands and usage
- `clear` - Clear conversation history and added file context
- `exit` or `quit` - End the chat session

#### Usage Examples
```bash
# Type '/' to see suggestions
💬 You: /
# Shows: /read <file_path> in grey text

# Type '/r' and press Tab to complete
💬 You: /r<Tab>
# Completes to: /read

# Add files to context silently
💬 You: /add src/utils.ts
Added src/utils.ts to context for the next prompt

💬 You: /add package.json
Added package.json to context for the next prompt

💬 You: Can you help optimize this utility function?
# AI receives both files plus your question

# Switch providers mid-conversation
💬 You: /model-switch
Available providers: ollama-qwen3, openai-gpt4o, gemini-flash
💬 You: /model-switch openai-gpt4o
Switched to OpenAI GPT-4o-mini
```
> [!NOTE]
> Performance depends on your config settings and for local models, context window size

### Search Examples with `/search`

The `/search` command supports two modes:

**Filename Search (Default):**
```bash
💬 You: /search component     # Finds files with "component" in filename
💬 You: /search utils.ts      # Finds files with "utils.ts" in filename
```

**Content Search (Advanced):**
```bash
💬 You: /search "import React" --searchType literal --maxResults 5
💬 You: /search error --includeGlobs "*.ts" "*.js" --excludeGlobs "*.test.*"
💬 You: /search "class.*Component" --searchType regex --contextLines 3
```
Refer to [slash-commands](/docs/SLASH-COMMANDS.md) for more details.

## Configuration

Aiya uses YAML configuration files with the following hierarchy:
1. Project-level: `.aiya.yaml` in current directory
2. Global: `~/.aiya/config.yaml`
3. Environment variables

### Environment Variables

You can override configuration using environment variables:
- `AIYA_MODEL` - Override model selection
- `AIYA_BASE_URL` - Override server endpoint
- `AIYA_STREAMING` - Enable/disable streaming (true/false)
- `AIYA_VERBOSE` - Enable verbose logging (true/false)
- `AIYA_CONFIG_PATH` - Custom config file path

### Example `.aiya.yaml` 
Multi-provider configuration example:
```yaml
providers:
  ollama-qwen3:
    type: ollama
    model: qwen3:8b
    baseUrl: http://localhost:11434
  openai-gpt4o:
    type: openai
    model: gpt-4o-mini
    apiKey: your-openai-api-key
  gemini-flash:
    type: gemini
    model: gemini-1.5-flash
    apiKey: your-gemini-api-key

defaultProvider: ollama-qwen3

security:
  allowedExtensions:
    - .ts
    - .js
    - .py
    - .md
  restrictToWorkspace: true
  maxFileSize: 1048576

ui:
  streaming: true
  showTokens: true
  thinking: 'auto'
```
Refer to [init process](/docs/INIT-PROCESS.md) for more details.

## MCP Tool System

Aiya includes a built-in Model Context Protocol (MCP) tool system that enables file operations:

### Available Tools

#### Core File Operations
- **ReadFile**: Read file contents with encoding options and line range selection
- **WriteFile**: Write content to file with safety features and mode options (overwrite/create-only/append)
- **EditFile**: Apply targeted edits using replace/insert/delete operations with fuzzy matching
- **SearchFiles**: Search files with literal and regex patterns, including context lines

### Tool Usage
The AI model can automatically call these tools when needed during chat sessions. Tools are invoked using JSON function calls and provide secure, workspace-restricted file access. Advanced tools support features like atomic operations, regex patterns, and batch processing for complex file manipulation tasks.

## Basic Security

- All file operations are restricted to the current workspace directory
- Automatic backup creation for file modifications (needs refining)

## Development

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build the project
npm run build

# Run type checking
npm run typecheck

# Run in development mode
npm run dev

# Run tests
npm run test              # All tests (watch mode)
npm run test:run          # All tests (single run)
npm run test:unit         # Unit tests only
npm run test:integration  # Integration tests only
npm run test:coverage     # Tests with coverage report

# Code quality and formatting
npm run lint              # Run ESLint on source code
npm run lint:fix          # Auto-fix ESLint issues
npm run format            # Format code with Prettier
npm run format:check      # Check code formatting
```

## Changelog

- **Version 1.3.0** - Reworked MCP tools system with improved file operations and better error handling. Also added more documentation.
- **Version 1.2.0** - Multi-provider support (Ollama, OpenAI, Gemini), runtime provider switching, unified CommandRegistry system, development quality setup (ESLint/Prettier), vitest setup, and improved setup wizard.
- **Version 1.1.1** - Enhanced terminal UI with modern terminal behaviors and improved user experience.
- **Version 1.0.0** - Basic terminal tool with Ollama support and filesystem MCP tooling.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Feature/v1.4 base (#7)
* base shell tool

README.md, after:

# Aiya

Artificial Intelligence: Your Assistant (AIYA). A modern(?) terminal tool for AI-assisted development with multi-provider support.

**Version 1.4.0** - Added shell command execution capabilities to the MCP tools system.

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/aiya-cli.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/js/aiya-cli)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Features

- Aiya.. this is just a budget version of all the other fancy LLM tools out there. Building this just for myself to test Ollama models.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 20 or higher
- At least one AI provider:
  - **Ollama**: Local models (qwen2.5-coder:7b, qwen3:8b, etc.)
  - **OpenAI**: API key for GPT-4, GPT-4 Turbo, etc.
  - **Google Gemini**: API key for Gemini 1.5 Pro/Flash models

## Installation

```bash
npm install -g aiya-cli
```

Or run from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jhyoong/Aiya.git
cd Aiya
npm install
npm run build
```

## Quick Start

1. Initialize Aiya in your project (interactive setup):
```bash
aiya init
```

2. Start an interactive chat session:
```bash
aiya chat
```

## Global Options

These options are available on all commands:
- `--verbose, -v` - Enable verbose logging for debugging
- `--config <path>` - Specify custom config file path

## Commands

### `aiya init`
Initialize Aiya configuration for the current project through an interactive setup wizard that guides you through provider configuration and connection testing.

### `aiya chat`
Start an interactive chat session with the AI featuring a modern terminal interface built with React/Ink.

#### Terminal Interface Features

#### Chat Commands
- **Command Suggestions**: Type `/` to see available commands with grey text hints. Press Tab to quickly select commands.
- `/read <file>` - Read and display file content in the terminal
- `/add <file>` - Add file content to context for the next prompt (silent)
- `/search <pattern>` - Search for files by name (default) or content with options
- `/tokens` - Show token usage statistics for the current session
- `/thinking` - Toggle thinking mode display (on/off/auto)
- `/model-switch` - Switch between configured AI providers mid-conversation
- `help` - Show available commands and usage
- `clear` - Clear conversation history and added file context
- `exit` or `quit` - End the chat session

#### Usage Examples
```bash
# Type '/' to see suggestions
💬 You: /
# Shows: /read <file_path> in grey text

# Type '/r' and press Tab to complete
💬 You: /r<Tab>
# Completes to: /read

# Add files to context silently
💬 You: /add src/utils.ts
Added src/utils.ts to context for the next prompt

💬 You: /add package.json
Added package.json to context for the next prompt

💬 You: Can you help optimize this utility function?
# AI receives both files plus your question

# Switch providers mid-conversation
💬 You: /model-switch
Available providers: ollama-qwen3, openai-gpt4o, gemini-flash
💬 You: /model-switch openai-gpt4o
Switched to OpenAI GPT-4o-mini
```
> [!NOTE]
> Performance depends on your config settings and for local models, context window size

### Search Examples with `/search`

The `/search` command supports two modes:

**Filename Search (Default):**
```bash
💬 You: /search component     # Finds files with "component" in filename
💬 You: /search utils.ts      # Finds files with "utils.ts" in filename
```

**Content Search (Advanced):**
```bash
💬 You: /search "import React" --searchType literal --maxResults 5
💬 You: /search error --includeGlobs "*.ts" "*.js" --excludeGlobs "*.test.*"
💬 You: /search "class.*Component" --searchType regex --contextLines 3
```
Refer to [slash-commands](/docs/SLASH-COMMANDS.md) for more details.

## Configuration

Aiya uses YAML configuration files with the following hierarchy:
1. Project-level: `.aiya.yaml` in current directory
2. Global: `~/.aiya/config.yaml`
3. Environment variables

### Environment Variables

You can override configuration using environment variables:
- `AIYA_MODEL` - Override model selection
- `AIYA_BASE_URL` - Override server endpoint
- `AIYA_STREAMING` - Enable/disable streaming (true/false)
- `AIYA_VERBOSE` - Enable verbose logging (true/false)
- `AIYA_CONFIG_PATH` - Custom config file path

### Example `.aiya.yaml` 
Multi-provider configuration example:
```yaml
providers:
  ollama-qwen3:
    type: ollama
    model: qwen3:8b
    baseUrl: http://localhost:11434
  openai-gpt4o:
    type: openai
    model: gpt-4o-mini
    apiKey: your-openai-api-key
  gemini-flash:
    type: gemini
    model: gemini-1.5-flash
    apiKey: your-gemini-api-key

defaultProvider: ollama-qwen3

security:
  allowedExtensions:
    - .ts
    - .js
    - .py
    - .md
  restrictToWorkspace: true
  maxFileSize: 1048576

ui:
  streaming: true
  showTokens: true
  thinking: 'auto'
```
Refer to [init process](/docs/INIT-PROCESS.md) for more details.

## MCP Tool System

Aiya includes a built-in Model Context Protocol (MCP) tool system that enables file operations:

### Available Tools

#### Core File Operations
- **ReadFile**: Read file contents with encoding options and line range selection
- **WriteFile**: Write content to file with safety features and mode options (overwrite/create-only/append)
- **EditFile**: Apply targeted edits using replace/insert/delete operations with fuzzy matching
- **SearchFiles**: Search files with literal and regex patterns, including context lines

#### Shell Operations
- **RunCommand**: Execute bash commands with timeout protection and secure output capture

### Tool Usage
The AI model can automatically call these tools when needed during chat sessions. Tools are invoked using JSON function calls and provide secure, workspace-restricted file access. Advanced tools support features like atomic operations, regex patterns, batch processing for complex file manipulation tasks, and shell command execution for development workflows.

## Basic Security

- All file operations are restricted to the current workspace directory
- Automatic backup creation for file modifications (needs refining)

## Development

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build the project
npm run build

# Run type checking
npm run typecheck

# Run in development mode
npm run dev

# Run tests
npm run test              # All tests (watch mode)
npm run test:run          # All tests (single run)
npm run test:unit         # Unit tests only
npm run test:integration  # Integration tests only
npm run test:coverage     # Tests with coverage report

# Code quality and formatting
npm run lint              # Run ESLint on source code
npm run lint:fix          # Auto-fix ESLint issues
npm run format            # Format code with Prettier
npm run format:check      # Check code formatting
```

## Changelog

- **Version 1.4.0** - Added shell command execution capabilities to the MCP tools.
- **Version 1.3.0** - Reworked MCP tools system with improved file operations and better error handling. Also added more documentation.
- **Version 1.2.0** - Multi-provider support (Ollama, OpenAI, Gemini), runtime provider switching, unified CommandRegistry system, development quality setup (ESLint/Prettier), vitest setup, and improved setup wizard.
- **Version 1.1.1** - Enhanced terminal UI with modern terminal behaviors and improved user experience.
- **Version 1.0.0** - Basic terminal tool with Ollama support and filesystem MCP tooling.

## License

MIT
